Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Ops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Karen Lloyd. She's the
Wrigley Chair in Environmental Studies and professor of Earth
Sciences at the University of Southern California. And today
we're talking about her book Intra-Terrestrials Discovering the Strangest
Life on Earth. So, Doctor Lloyd, welcome to the
show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thanks for having me.
So what are intraterrestrials?
It's not a very commonly used term, but, um,
it's, I'm using it to talk about anything that's
alive inside Earth. Um, IT turns out that it's
a kind of a different community than what we
experience in our daily lives, um, different enough that
it kind of needs it, its own name. Um,
I didn't come up with that name, but, um,
a couple of other scientists did, but I find
it useful.
And are these all unicellular organisms, or can some
of them be multicellular?
For the most part, these are unicellular organisms, so
tiny little single-celled microbes, um, but of course they
interact with each other and they form sort of
biofilms with each other and so then you start
to that question of what's a single-celled organism versus
what's a tissue, you know, is this a community.
Um, SO that line gets a little hazy, but
also some of my colleagues have found like eukaryotes,
so worms, tiny worms, um, buried deeply in Earth's
crust as well. So I wouldn't rule out the
presence of, um, some small multicellular organisms as well.
Yeah, and what is the subsurface habitat like? I
mean, how, and does it vary or not?
Yeah, it's pretty varied all over Earth. I mean,
so you can think about Earth as in like
layers and the layer that we're concerned with in
our daily lives is where the trees and the
sun and the birds and, you know, all the,
all the things that we experience in our daily
life, but we don't often spend a lot of
time thinking about what's underneath our feet. And, you
know, literally where you're standing right now, underneath you
is probably some soil, probably some Um, rock, um,
you know, eventually it gets pretty hot if you
keep going straight down from where you are right
now. Um, BUT, you know, you and I are
in different places and so what that environment would
look like underneath our feet is very different. It
would have different amounts of porosity. It would have
different types of energetic resources that can support life.
Um, IT'S, uh, it's actually a, a vastly diverse
ecosystem down there.
And how do you go about exhuming living beings
from the subsurface?
Um, WE go about it in a lot of
different ways. Um, IT tends to be, um, creative
and sometimes desperate. Um, IT'S hard to get things
from inside Earth, um. So, sort of the two
main categories as I see it are either we
dig down to them or we wait for them
to come up to us. And so the digging
down to them option is a lot of um
we have giant drills and drill ships that we
can go out in the ocean and drill underneath
the ocean. There's drilling on land, making big boreholes.
These are pretty big, um, a lot of financial
and time and expertise resources have to go into,
to doing these sorts of things or we can
do simpler things like just take a handheld core,
uh, like punching a straw into a slushie. Um.
There's also sort of waiting for it to come
back up to us. There's a lot of natural
springs that are deeply sourced. So you can go
to like one place in Canada has um some
waters that are gushing up slowly from a giant
underground aquifer that are, have not seen the light
of day for over a billion years, which I
just still have trouble even understanding the magnitude of
that.
Yeah. Uh, AND since they tend to be, or
for the most part, they are unicellular, cellular, and
they are so small, how do you see them?
What kinds of techniques do you employ?
So we use a lot of um sort of
uh DNA techniques is probably our number one way
of getting at these things because if you, if
you spread them out on a petri dish or
you put them in some liquid medium and wait
for them to start growing, like maybe they don't
know how to react to what you've given them
to eat. Um, SO you can't expect them to
do that. So we, um, generally speaking, kill them.
The first thing we do is kill them. Don't
worry, there's, there's literally billions and billions, they are,
they're all right. Um, AND then, uh, we crack
them open and take out their DNA, um, but
we also, you know, since we found DNA to
be so useful in reconstructing their lives, we try
to take all the biomolecules that we can. So
we take RNA, take proteins, we take small metabolites.
Um, LIPIDS, we just, whatever we can do to,
to sort of pick apart what these things' lives
are, um, and then we measure all the chemicals
around them too and sort of put those two
things together and say, OK, there's genes to eat
a certain chemical. Do we see evidence of that
chemical is being eaten, that kind of thing.
And how do they breathe, quote unquote in these
environments, and I mean what corresponds to their breathing?
Yeah,
breathing is a tough word. It's, um, you know,
it's, you, they, what they do is they take
breathing down to its most essential chemical details, um,
you know, we associate breathing with. Inspiration, you know,
lungs taking air into our lungs, um, and that,
that's true, of course, um, but they, um, show
that that's not the important part of breathing. The
important part even for us of breathing is when
those tiny chemicals that are carried in our blood
reach the oxygen that's in, you know, that comes
into our lungs and the, the, the actual respiration
part of this is that chemical reaction that we
have in our own bodies with um Electron-rich chemicals
from our food and oxygen. And so, since these,
these organisms sort of, I don't want to say
they realized that, but they make use of the
fact that that's all that respiration is. Um, IT
doesn't depend on oxygen, it doesn't depend on air.
Um, THEY will do that chemical reaction with lots
and lots of chemicals. So that really cracks open
the possibilities for, for breathing for life to extend
to Almost everything in the middle of the periodic
table can be breathed by something on life, um,
in, on, I'm sorry, on Earth. Um, THEY, anything,
any chemical or element that is capable of giving
up an electron or receiving an electron is probably
gonna be used by life to breathe, um, and
they even go so far as to Um, not
even use chemicals in some cases. Um, THEY just
break it down to its barest essentials, which is
really just the movement of electrons and they can
work with electrons directly.
Mhm. And, and some of them even breathe, so
to speak, uh, rocks,
yeah, yeah. So these solid surfaces are great places
in the subsurface. I mean, if there's one thing
that the subsurface is rich with, it's rocks, right?
It is, it's made up of rocks, and so
that's nice because it's a nice place to settle.
It's a nice place to sort of hang out
and a home that you can make. For yourself
if you're a subsurface being, um, but also the
rocks are often made of these metals like iron.
They're really good at either accepting an electron or
donating an electron and so they can, they can
do that right there with the rocks around them.
So they, it's kind of like they're breathing their
house.
Uh, AND how do they have access to energy?
Um, SO, they, you know, if you think about
rock and you think about trying to live in
rock, it may seem like nothing really happens, um,
but actually, you can, um, things do happen. Um,
FLUIDS move around, we have earthquakes, there's, um, ways
to make new chemicals. So there, there is Sources
of energy that are geological sources of energy that
have nothing to do with sunlight, you know, our
main form of energy up here is, is sunlight
and then the things that come from that later
like the breakdown of the plants, the food that
the plants make for us, um, but they are
instead dependent upon geological sources of all these chemicals.
How do they play with thermodynamics? I mean, how
does it work in their case?
Yeah, so thermodynamics is not something that we talk
about a lot with biology, um, and that's, uh,
the fact that we don't talk about it with
biology is, is instructive, you know, we, we don't
talk about it that much. I mean, there are
parts of biology that, that do do, I don't.
I want to say that no one does, but,
you know, it's just not in our common parlance.
Um, WE think of it more as like a
chemistry or a physics thing, but the reason that
we don't talk about it that much, at least
for respiration, is that our thermo thermodynamics as these,
you know, beings that we are, are quite boring.
Like we just have a ton of energy. We're
not energy-limited. Um, OUR food will always, as long
as we have access to food and air, we
will always get energy from it. These beings, these
subsurface beings live at the Edge of what's thermodynamically
possible. They're getting energy from tiny, tiny little quanta
of energy that are so small that something, if
something changes about their environment, then the same food
that gave them energy yesterday, even when it's present,
will not give them energy today. And that is,
that is just something that it's a It's a
situation for which we have no analog in our
lives. Like, it doesn't, a hamburger is always gonna
give you energy as long as you can breathe,
um, but for them that can switch on them,
and, and I, I find that really fascinating. Mhm.
I, in what ways would you say these beings
change our conception of life?
So, we have this, this assumption that, you know,
we are, I shouldn't speak for other people. I,
I sort of have this implicit assumption in my
own head that everything does need um sunlight and
everything does need oxygen because that, that really is
what drives everything up here. Um, BUT these Intraterrestrials
show us that actually there's a whole another world
that can exist without sunlight and without the dead
things falling down. I mean, they use the dead
bodies that fall down for sure. Um, BUT that
they can get by without it as well. Um,
THEY can do all the same things without any
inputs from the surface world. And that, that is
the notion that there are, that life extends that
deeply into the realm of chemistry and into the
realm of physics is something that Changes my, my
way of thinking, for sure.
Does the existence of these intraterrestrials have any implications
uh as uh for what we know about the
evolutionary relationships among all life on Earth?
So one of the weirdest things that we found
when we first started looking at DNA that we
pull out of these deep environments was that the
DNA that we were pulling out did not match
the DNA of anything we'd ever seen before. Um,
I, I was there for this. This was one
of my first projects as a PhD student in
the early 2000s. I was trying to, you know,
I was, I was pulling these DNA sequences out
of some deep subsurface samples. And I was like,
OK, am I gonna have this kind of proteobacteria
or am I gonna have a firm acute? Is
it gonna be gram positive? Is it gonna be
gram negative? All these things that I've learned about
microbiology. And what it was, was none of that.
It was Totally, totally independent. It was so weird
that I thought I was screwing it up, um,
because when you're first starting out, that's always, I
see this in my own students. The first thought
is, well, I just, I just messed it up
somehow. Let's throw it all away and start over
and like, wait, don't throw it away. You're doing
a good job. Um, SO, uh, one reason why
I knew that it wasn't me who was screwing
up, is that it matched almost perfectly to what
my colleagues were getting in Japan, and what other
colleagues were getting um in New Jersey, and different
places all around the world and the UK. And
so when you put together, when you string together
like, 1500, that's how long this gene is, 1500
AG C T T GC, uh, you know, if
you get that order, almost exactly the same between
what I'm getting in the Gulf of Mexico and
what somebody's getting in Japan, that didn't happen by
accident. Um, I didn't screw up and they didn't
screw up. We're both looking at something real, but
it's something that no one's ever seen before. And
what we found, we now know is that this
is a new deep branch. There's many, many new
deep branches on the tree of life, and we
have so many more relatives than we ever knew
that we did, um, on this planet.
So I would like to ask you now about
the kinds of organisms that we can find across
different kinds of environments just for people to also
have a better understanding of exactly what we're talking
about here. So, what kinds of life have you
found on the sea floor and particularly in methane
seeps?
Yeah, so methane seeps are a great source of
energy for microbiota. Um, METHANE can interact with sulfate,
it can interact with iron, it can interact with
oxygen to do all these different respirations. Um, SO
we tend to see, um, uh, a lot of
energetic things happening at methane seeps at the bottom
of the sea. So, if you go down in
a, in a submersible, um, In the Atlantic basin
in the middle of the Atlantic and you drop
down, it's just kinda be a sandy-looking muddy bottom
without much going on. You might see a couple
of things, but if you drop down onto a
methane seep, you're gonna see a teeming life, crabs
and worms and worms that are so dependent upon
the microbial interaction with these chemicals that they actually
don't have mouths. Anymore. They don't even try to
eat normal worm food. They just bring in chemicals
for these little intraterrestrials that live inside their bodies
and they, those microbes then will make food for
the worm. Um, THEY'RE completely dependent upon it.
How about the Arctic permafrost? What kinds of organisms
can we find there?
Um, WE'RE really, um, just starting to work on
permafrost, I would say, because, um, it's often quite
inaccessible. It's buried underneath layers of, of soil, um,
so you, you have to drill down to it
for the most part. Um, SOMETIMES when it slumps
as it's thawing from climate change, we can kind
of get at it from the side, um, which
can be useful as well. Um, SO, what we're
seeing from this is that actually there seem to
be a lot of things that live in permafrost,
even very ancient permafrost, and um that's, that's not
a new idea. This is um, Um, some colleagues
of mine in Russia for, uh, maybe 20 years
ago came up with this concept of, um, these
brines. So as you freeze, if you take to
soil with water in it, and it freezes, then
the water that freezes into ice is freezing as
pure water like H2O, which leaves any salts that
were like even freshwater will have like a little
bit of salts in it. That will again, then
get concentrated in the remaining liquid water. Such that
as you increase as you make more and more
ice, at some point, the leftover water is salty
enough that it actually lowers its freezing point. And
so now this briny water that's leftover never freezes.
So it's below zero, it can be -5, -10,
but it's liquid and so these organisms do live
in permafrost slowly. They're not doing much, um, but
as far as we can tell, they're alive in
permafrost.
Another place that I would imagine people would not
think it would be possible to find life there
is the bottom of active volcanoes. So what can
we find there exactly?
So I do not, well, I have not, and
I, I want to be clear that I'm not
saying that we're finding life in lava. Lava is
too hot for life that we know, um. You
know, I won't discount that life can be made
of other things than carbon, but carbon-based life is,
is gonna burn up in lava. Um, BUT the
nice thing about volcanoes is that they are the
ultimate source of good geological food and nutrients coming
up to the, to the surface. And so, They
bring with them, uh, carbon dioxide, nitrogen compounds, so
much sulfur compounds, and iron. Um, THERE'S just a
lot of really important biological elements that are brought
up by volcanoes from the deep earth. And so,
what you'll see is when it gets cool enough
on the edges of volcanoes, even down at the
base of them, even very close to the inside
of them, we see life just creeping in wherever
it can to make use of all that good
stuff. Until it erupts and is killed.
And as far as you explore in your book,
there's also life, or there can, there can also
exist life in boiling water, pure acid, and bleach,
right? I mean, those are at least they sound
like extreme
conditions. Yeah, it's wild. The first time I started
working on hypertherm. IS what we call the ones
that live in 100 degrees. Um, IF you've ever
done like a lab class or something and you
had to make media, you maybe made an auger
plate, you had to be very careful to be
sterile, right? Like you didn't want to contaminate your,
your medium. So that's how we do it. That's
how we make media. And it's such a strange
cognitive dissonance to be You know, holding these, being
so careful with media preparation and, you know, being
so loving and, and making sure that there's everything
that these organisms need to live. And then when
you inoculate it, when you have a hyperthermophile, you
throw it in a vat of boiling water. And
it just feels so weird. I mean, it's in
a tube, right? So it's not like the water
doesn't get inside the, the thing. But it's so
weird to be like, spending time nurturing this precious
little thing and then you just like dunk it
in boiling water. But if you don't do that,
it's not gonna grow. And so it's, it's really
amazing. Um, THEY, they really, they just need things
to be that hot. Otherwise, their enzymes don't really
work right. Yeah, wild.
Yeah, yeah, right. Uh, IN your book, you also
talk about how some of them can live for
hundreds or even thousands of years or longer. How
can they do that?
Yeah, we, this is something we are definitely still
working on. Um, PROVING that is hard. Um, YOU
know, we can do a lot with variables. We
can make all kinds of temperatures, we can make
all kinds of pressures in our labs. Um, THERE
are people who, there are geologists who make ultra-high
pressures. They can basically recreate some of the pressures
deep inside Earth, inside their own laboratories, which is
amazing. Um, BUT we can't manipulate time. So, we
cannot run an experiment for 1000 years or even
100,000 years, you know, that, that we would need
to replicate this. So, We think that they live
for that long because we find them in places
where we know that no material has moved in
and out for, you know, 100,000 years or so.
And we can see that they're alive and we
can see the waste products that they've made and
we can look at the rate at which they've
been breathing and we can use thermodynamics to calculate
how much energy that they had. And when we
add all that up and we compare it to
the amount of energy that it would take to
create a, a baby, it's, it doesn't work. They
can't do it. There's not enough energy there to
ever have divided. And we look at their genes,
we don't see a lot of evidence that they're
evolving over 100,000 years, which if something's growing normally,
100,000 years is plenty of time to, to make
something happen. Um, AND we don't see evidence of
big evolutionary changes over these times. So, um, our
best guess is that they're just not growing for
that long.
Yeah, but how is it that they evolved to
stop growing for that long?
We don't really know the answer to that either,
but in my book, I get very speculative about
it because you have to, like, what are you
gonna do? These things exist. This seems to be
true. Um, EVERYTHING I learned about evolution was about
fast, like speed, be the one to reproduce faster.
Um, YOU know, we know that that's not always
the case, you know, if you look at Um,
shrimp growing in the ocean, they reproduce quickly versus
an elephant which reproduces slowly and lives a long
time. So we have words for these, our strategists
and K strategists in ecology. Um, BUT still an
elephant is not gonna live 1000 years. Um, THERE'S
a couple of trees that will live for 1000
years, maybe a few 1000 but their individual cells
turn over much faster than that. So the idea
that there would be a living cell that would
live for that long is not something that, definitely
not something that Charles Darwin thought about. I, I
think I, I feel pretty confident in saying he
never, he never had to work out how that
fit on into natural selection. Um, SO now we're
faced with this problem and um, We, I, I
would really like to not reject Darwin because I
think that would get me in, in some trouble.
Um, BUT you have to think, OK, do we,
should we reject Darwin or are these things actually
doing natural selection? And I can imagine that, you
know, to, to make sure that Darwin's OK. Um,
WE can do natural selection with these things based
on something that they experience in the far, far
future. Um, SO if you are an intraterrestrial, you
don't really have much to eat, nothing's really going
on, you're getting buried slowly in the sea floor.
Um, IT just seems like a one-way trip to
hell, you know, you're never gonna come back, you're
just gonna die down there, you maybe get buried
in the mantle. But actually, if you can wait
for tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of years,
then actually you could come back up after an
earthquake or you could come back up in a
volcano, um, not again, not in the lava, not
in the magma parts, but you can get sort
of flushed out of the sides of it. Um,
OR as these sediments pile up when continents collide
into each other. So, I think that there could
be evolutionary drivers that happen on geological time scales,
which is really, really hard to think about as
a biologist.
Do these life forms tell us anything about the
origins of life on Earth?
So 11 thing that's important when we think about
how life originated on Earth, if it did in
fact originate on Earth, is that we have to
think about what is life, like what are the
full range of life. And so one way that
these things help us think about that is that
they do tell us about um what all is
there. So, Life can be very, very slow. Life
can function on very, very low energy, um, delivery
gradients. And so, those two facts really expand our
notion of like, What kinds of things could support
early life on Earth. Um, AND they, they actually
get in, they get us a bit into the
second law of thermodynamics, which is that entropy must
always increase. And that fact, um, really seems to
be driving a lot of what life is. And
so, In a way, they sort of help us
see life as more of a process than like
a cell. Like the fact that these things are
living cells is sort of not the point. The
point of them is that they are doing a
better job of increasing entropy in an open system
over longer and longer time scales. And I, I
think that's, by taking that view, we can sort
of think about the origin of life a little
differently.
But as far as we know, where and how
did life first form on Earth?
We don't know. Anybody who says they know, does
not know. I've heard, I've heard people have fights
over this, like, oh, it couldn't have formed there,
it has to form here. It definitely formed here,
and like, at the end of the day, we
truly, truly don't know. It doesn't mean we shouldn't
think about it and, you know, do our best
to, to imagine it, um, but I mean, I
think that there's, the subsurface is at least in
the running for a good place to form life.
Um, IT'S protected from a lot of the harsh
things that happen up at the surface of the
earth like bombardment and um radiation from the sun.
Um, BUT also, it just offers all these diverse
gradients. Um, SO there's just many, many different chemicals
sitting at different redox states. And so, if a
variety of energy sources at very low power are
advantageous to sort of getting this nascent life going,
then the subsurface is, is gonna, gonna be a
great place to do it.
And as far as we know, is there any
depth at which life ceases to exist?
I would say there has to be, but I
don't know where it is. Right now, 8 kilometers
is, is kind of our record, um, but it's
just basically because we haven't really dug much deeper
than that. Um, IT'S hard, it's hard to dig
down very deep despite You know, movies like the
core, which is a really, really fun movie, but
you know, the, the people in it drill, they
go down, they physically go down to the core,
like we can't do that. Um, YOU know, even
though we know a lot about the core and
the mantle and the crust of Earth, we know
that mostly from seismics and from rocks that sort
of get popped up on land and, and analyzing
their chemicals. We've never been to the mantle.
Right, but what are the limits really? I mean,
do we know what are the conditions in which
life can really no longer exist?
So some people think, and this is a, I
think this is a good idea, that temperature is
gonna be the ultimate limiter, um, you know, just
at the point at which things incinerate is, as
I said, you know, lava is a no go,
um, so you definitely get the lava temperatures, um,
within the crust for sure. Um. But the thing
about temperature is that it could be offset by
pressure, um, because high temperature disorders things and pressure
pushes them back together again. So it is possible
that under high pressures, you could actually extend the
temperature, uh, range over which life can be found
too. So, um, I, we're, the, the only thing
I know about the ultimate depth at which we'll
find that life ceases to exist is that we
have not hit it yet. Mhm.
How much of life on Earth do you think
we have yet to discover?
Well, at every moment, it sort of feels like,
OK, we're pretty much done now, you know, we're,
we're slowing down. I, I don't discover a new
phylum every day anymore, you know, that, that used
to be a daily occurrence, and now it's, you
know, maybe once every few years or something. Um,
IT'S It feels like we may be slowing down,
but then I remind myself, people would have said
the same thing in the 70s, like, oh, we've
pretty much nailed it and they didn't even know
about the subsurface at that point. Um, SO, I
imagine that when we get a new way of
looking for life, we're gonna discover a whole new
axis of life that I can't even imagine right
now.
In terms of the potential applications that these life
forms might have, can they help us fight climate
change, for example?
Yeah, so they are uh very much involved in
our climate and regulating our climate in a natural
way over long time scales. But if we want
to interact with them more immediately, um, they're very
credible, um, technologies on the books to bury carbon,
to sequester it out of the atmosphere and sort
of lock it away underground. Um, AND if that
becomes a valid strategy, it will never be the
silver bullet. We're going to have to also decrease
emissions and, and do all the other good things
that we need to do. Um. If that becomes
a strategy for mitigating climate change, it will only
be successful if we do so with the knowledge
that there are living things down there and they're
gonna help or hurt, um, but we can't act
like this is a sterile Tupperware container and we
can just like throw things down there and out
of sight, out of mind because somebody's down there
and they might spit them back at us. So
we, we've got to pay attention to the microbes
and we do this.
And and what other kinds of applications do they
have?
Um, SO right now, we, I, I am a
firm believer that we have not Use them to
their maximum usefulness um for humans. Um, THE fact
that we are seeing such new types of life
means that they followed their, their biomolecules, their proteins
have been under evolutionary pressures that are totally foreign
to the rest of us. And so, they probably
have really cool things that their enzymes do like
The first thing that I can think of is
um high stability. Um, SO they should make enzymes
that last for a long time because that's a
good adaptation to, to low, low energy and, uh,
we, you know, for years, humans have been using
proteins taken out of microbes or out of animals
to, you know, do biotechnology with or bio medicine.
And if we start looking at some things from
the subsurface, maybe we can find ones that operate
a little bit better, more efficiently with higher affinity
for substrates or maybe they hang out on our,
um, maybe they can um be allowed to be
transported without refrigeration, which would save a ton of
money or make, um, You know, technology accessible to
places that don't have uh reliable electricity.
Looking into the future, what do you think life
will look like and how can we know that,
um, where, here or
yes, yes, on
Earth, on Earth, OK, um, so I think that
we are going to be, um, Less lonely because
I do think that we're gonna find life elsewhere.
Um, I think we just must, um, but life
on Earth, uh, going forward, you know, I think
we're, uh, I know this is like unnecessarily sunny,
but I think we're gonna be fine. I think
we're gonna figure out a way to, to not
poison ourselves. Um, WE'RE, we're just working through it
right now, um, and it's messy and it's not
good. Um, AND we are, you know, all the
climate alarm bells are, are the way to go,
like being, feeling alarmed is helpful because then we
will be moved to action. Um, BUT it's, it's
really, we're going to find a way as a
species to interact, to recognize that we're not outside
of nature, that we're part of it, and we're
part of this continuum, even with these strange beings
that seem to live for maybe a million years
and their genes look nothing like our genes. Um,
THEY look enough like our genes to know that
we are rela related to them and um, I
think we're gonna figure out how to, how to
live with them better.
Uh, WHEN it comes to finding life on other
planets, what do intraterrestrials tell us about what life
might look like?
So the first thing that they do is that
they expand the area over which we can search
for life within our solar system or outside. So
we spent a lot of time looking at the
surface of planets just out of necessity and planetary
bodies because that's the part that we can get
at. Um, BUT if you peel off the layers
of You know, every planet and moon in this
solar system and then every planet and moon in
all the galaxies all around the universe. Now, you've
really compounded the area over which life can exist.
And so, I think that subsurface life may be
extremely common in our universe. We just have to
find it. It's hard.
And in what ways do you think we should
perhaps expand the range of conditions where life might
exist across the universe to try to find it?
I think that we, um, when we think about,
um, Goldilocks planets, so we, we right now think
about planets that are close enough to a warm
star but not too hot of a star to
allow liquid water at their surface. That's, that's sort
of our criteria for, it's like Kepler's criteria for
an Earth-like planet. Um, BUT you could, you can
put in models that say, OK, well, now like
3 kilometers down. Is it close enough to the
star and is the star bright enough to allow
or and not too bright to allow liquid water?
Um, I think that you would have a lot
more Earth-like planets to, to choose from. Mhm.
OK, great. So the book is again Interrestrials, Discovering
the Strangest Life on Earth. I will be leaving
a link to it in the description of the
interview. And Doctor Lloyd, uh, apart from the book,
where can people find your work on the internet?
Um, SO I gave a couple of TED Talks
a little while ago, so you can just Google
Karen Lloyd TED Talk. They come up. Um, I
put a ton of work into them, so hopefully
you, you find them entertaining, um. And uh yeah,
I just, uh, I don't know, I need to
figure out how to be on Instagram. I'm not,
I'm not good, guys. I'm gonna work on it.
I'm gonna try to share. I'm headed to the
Arctic in September and Yeah, I'll try to share
that with people better.
OK, great. So thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a pleasure to talk with you.
You as well. Thanks so much for having me.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inasi Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Sverggoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Eddin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolatti, Gabriel Pan Scortez
or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith,
and Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.